ADNOC, Occidental Petroleum Open World’s Largest Ultra Sour Gas Project
in Closing Bell Story‎ / Midstream / OPEC / Today's News   by— Oil & Gas 360
April 26, 2016Share Print 
Occidental would like to expand the Al Hosn Gas project: Hollub
Oil & Gas 360
Shah Field plant will process over 1bn cubic feet per day of gas.

ADNOC has a 60% share in Al Hosn Gas; Occidental Petroleum has 40%
PR Newswire – ADNOC inaugurated the Al Hosn Sour Gas Development Project, the largest of its kind in the world. The Shah Field plant is the first ultra sour gas project to produce and safely process more than one billion cubic feet per day of ultra sour gas from a single gas plant. Located in 210 kilometres south west of Abu Dhabi city, Al Hosn is a joint venture between ADNOC and Occidental Petroleum.

The project was inaugurated by Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi and Deputy Supreme Commander of the UAE Armed Forces. He was accompanied on a tour of the plant by Dr. Sultan Ahmed Al Jaber, CEO of ADNOC and Vicki Hollub, President, Chief Operating Officer and incoming CEO of Occidental Petroleum.

Dr Al Jaber said: “The inauguration of the Al Hosn Shah Sour Gas Development Project is an important milestone for ADNOC, as we maximize the value of Abu Dhabi’s gas resources to meet the United Arab Emirates and the world’s growing demand. It is a prime example of how ADNOC utilises innovative solutions to deliver on our strategic objectives and maintain our competitive edge.”
The $10 billion Shah Gas Development Project will produce 504 million cubic feet of natural gas, 33 thousand barrels of condensates, 4,400 tons of natural gas liquids and 9,900 tons of sulphur granules. In 2015 the facility produced 2 million tons of sulphur and is forecast to produce 3.2 million tonnes in 2016.

Vicki Hollub said: “The scale of the Shah Field development is larger than any other ultra-sour gas field in the world.  With our collaborative efforts, we have used our combined expertise to deliver the project on time and on budget.  Occidental is looking forward to the possibility of expanding the Al Hosn Gas project to help the UAE meet its energy needs.”

ADNOC has a 60% majority share in Al Hosn Gas and Occidental Petroleum has 40%.

About ADNOC

Abu Dhabi National Oil Company (ADNOC) is a major diversified group of energy and petrochemical companies, that produces 3.1 million barrels of oil a day. ADNOC’s activities include exploration and production of crude oil and natural gas; refining, marketing, supply and transportation, and the manufacture of petrochemicals.