Occidental’s New CEO on Its No-Layoff Pledge
CEO Vicki Hollub is sending newer workers into the field and taking the long view in the oil downturn
Occidental Petroleum CEO Vicki Hollub: How I Work
YOU MAY ALSO LIKE
Occidental Petroleum CEO Vicki Hollub: How I Work
Occidental Petroleum CEO Vicki Hollub: How I Work
Play video: Occidental Petroleum CEO Vicki Hollub: How I Work
Occidental Petroleum CEO Vicki Hollub spoke to The Wall Street Journal about her musical background, using sports metaphors as a management tool, and whether she'd rather tailgate with Bear Bryant or watch in the stands with Nick Saban. Photo: Kevin Hagen for The Wall Street Journal
By Erin AilworthFollow
July 5, 2016 12:37 pm ET

SAVE

PRINT

TEXT
4
The first woman chief executive of a major American energy explorer, Vicki Hollub has taken over Occidental Petroleum Corp. OXY -1.75%decrease; red down pointing triangle as the worst oil bust in a generation ravages the industry, resulting in more than 350,000 lost energy jobs world-wide.

Occidental, the third-largest U.S. energy company, with a market capitalization of roughly $58 billion, has fared better than most, losing only 25% of its stock value over the past two years as the price of crude dropped more than 50% to about $50 a barrel.

Amid a push to become a streamlined, cost-conscious oil producer, Occidental has slashed budgets and shed operations in California, Colorado, North Dakota, and the Middle East. Yet management has pledged not to lay off workers—a difficult decision, but one that ensures its employees will gain experience that will help the company ramp up faster than competitors can once prices rebound, Ms. Hollub said.

Occidental’s recent history has been a tumultuous one, notable for former CEO and Chairman Ray Irani’s battles with board members and shareholders over his compensation, which amounted to tens of millions a year.

NEWSLETTER SIGN-UP

The 10-Point.

A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal.


Preview

Subscribe
Ms. Hollub credits Occidental’s resilience to a corporate overhaul started by her predecessor, Steve Chazen, who led the company following Mr. Irani’s retirement.

In an interview, Ms. Hollub, 56 years old, talked about how Occidental is making good on its promise to employees, and why she has never turned down a job at Occidental. Edited excerpts:

WSJ: How are you holding to your no-layoffs pledge?

Ms. Hollub: Some of our early-career employees, we redeployed them to the field to replace contractors. We sent them out there knowing that there could be a little bit of a risk around whether they would make the best decisions.

What really happened is they were able to go out to the field and look at what we were doing and bring a different paradigm to it. I have to give some of the credit to our experienced field people who took a lot of these early-career people under their wings. In the end that’s going to be a huge benefit for us.

Another portion of our employees, we have them working on longer-term projects. Pulling them away from the day-to-day operations will have a major impact on our cost going forward. A lot of companies really haven’t thought about that.

WSJ: Activist investors ousted one of your predecessors. How does that color the way you run Occidental?

Ms. Hollub: I want to meet regularly with our shareholders. We want to always be aware of their concerns. If we’re ever surprised by anything that our largest shareholders think or want to happen, then that accountability is on us.

WSJ: Some would argue Occidental needs a fresh start. You’ve been with the company for 34 years, so how do you give it one?


Ms. Hollub: I think we should challenge the way we do everything. The good thing about my experience is that I was moved around a lot. I never said no to any job I was offered in Oxy. 

I’ve never been in any position longer than five years—and most of the time it has averaged three years or so. That’s enabled me to see a lot of different things, but most importantly be around a lot of different people.

I’m not set in the West Texas view. I’m not set in a California view, or a Russian view. In all those places I learned something from the people that I worked with.

WSJ: You credit University of Alabama football and onetime coach Paul “Bear” Bryant for your competitive streak.

Ms. Hollub: I was born in ’59; Bear Bryant went to Alabama in ’58. So I had the benefit of growing up with Bear Bryant’s success. Losing anything became painful to me, and seeing Alabama lose was especially painful.

The teams I’ve been on I’ve always tried to make sure that we won.

To be the best you really have to push yourself hard—not a lot came naturally to me. From a leadership perspective, it’s helped me to want to set people up so that, as teams, they can survive and win.

WSJ: What’s your appetite for deals?

Ms. Hollub: When you buy a company, you are going to get some things that you don’t want and that don’t fit with your strategy and your direction or your skill sets.

We just cleaned up our portfolio. We don’t want to have to go through that process again.

WSJ: What’s it like being the first woman to lead a major U.S. oil company?

Ms. Hollub: The company prepared me to move up and to take leadership roles. My first formal leadership role was given to me by one of my primary mentors and it was in a situation where there were other [male] candidates for that role that some people felt should have gotten the role.

When someone gives you a chance, you feel like you can’t fail. I always felt like my payback had to be that I would do the best that I could.