Occidental Petroleum sells Ingleside Energy Center to Moda Midstream
Chris Ramirez
Corpus Christi







Occidental Petroleum has sold its oil export terminal in Ingleside.

Oxy's Ingleside Energy Center, or IEC, is a crude oil storage and export terminal at the Port of Corpus Christi that has 2.1 million barrels of oil storage capacity and three deep-water berths for crude oil.

A "very large crude carrier" ship will dock at Occidental Petroleum on Friday. The 1,100-foot-long tanker will be the largest vessel to ever dock at a port in the Gulf of Mexico.
Moda Midstream, a Houston-based liquids terminaling and logistics provider, on Wednesday announced it was acquiring the facility.

“We see enormous growth potential and look forward to providing exceptional service to our existing and new customers for years to come,” said Bo McCall, Moda's president/CEO. 

The transaction is expected to close in the third quarter of 2018.

Word of the terminal's sale comes as Occidental Petroleum, a Houston company, posted a quarterly profit Wednesday of $848 million, a 65 percent increase when compared with $507 million during the same three months last year.


More:Port of Corpus Christi has big plans for Harbor Island in Port Aransas

More:The Coastal Bend remained a strong magnet for big business in 2017

In a statement, Occidental attributed the uptick to rising oil prices and production volumes. Occidental has been focused on continuing to grow in West Texas' booming Permian Basin.

In a statement, Moda said the terminal will link production in the Permian Basin and the Eagle Ford Shale energy play to key domestic and international markets. It will be connected directly to multiple long-haul crude pipelines that allow for batching and segregation of crude oil deliveries, the statement said.

The Anne docked at the Oxy Ingleside Energy Center on Friday, May 26, 2017. is the largest tanker to ever dock in a U.S Gulf of Mexico port. 
More:ExxonMobil estimates permitting, construction time as Taft, Ingleside envision boom

More:Massive crude payload loaded at Port of Corpus Christi

The Ingleside Energy Center terminal is designed to handle a wide range of vessels, including very large crude carriers, or VLCCs, even at high loading rates.

The facility played a key role in the port's historic test run of a super tanker's visit to the Gulf of Mexico nearly a year ago. The Anne, an 1,100-foot French ship, had no cargo aboard, but still needed five tug boats to safely dock at the terminal during the exercise.

 