Occidental Stock Is Falling Because the Anadarko Petroleum Buy Was Too Expensive, Analyst Says
By Teresa Rivas
Aug. 12, 2019 11:06 am ET
Order Reprints
Print Article


Uncredited
Text size

Occidental Petroleum stock is falling on Monday, following a downgrade from Evercore ISI, which argues that the company’s acquisition of Anadarko Petroleum destroyed value at the exploration and production firm.

The back story. While energy stocks in general have had a difficult 2019, Occidental stock (ticker: OXY) has been hit harder than most, falling 25.6% year to date; the shares are off more than 41% in the trailing 12-month period. While the price of oil is one factor weighing on the sector, Occidental in general is also struggling after outbidding Chevron (CVX) to acquire Anadarko. The move was unpopular with shareholder Carl Icahn, who believes Occidental is paying too much, and analysts also have their reservations. Occidental’s CEO purchased stock when it fell to a decade low, but that bet hasn’t turned a profit yet.

What’s new. On Monday, Evercore ISI analyst Doug Terreson resumed coverage of Occidental, but lowered his rating to In-Line from Outperform. Like others, his main concern is the Anadarko deal, which may have come at too high a price for Occidental. “The company’s ‘Pledge’ for greater capital discipline and enhanced corporate governance proved fleeting with return on capital employed to decline significantly due to the Anadarko transaction,” he warned.

EDITOR'S CHOICE
Looking ahead. While energy firms as a whole have a reputation for less-than-stellar financial stewardship, conservative capital strategies have become more important to investors in recent years, as oil prices continue to languish. And many energy companies that have taken this tact have been rewarded, as “These companies provide credible pathways for value creation and return of capital to shareholders,” Terreson writes.


By contrast, he believes that the Anadarko deal is value-destructive, given the dilutive nature of the transition, and this year’s stock price shows how the market is being rightly skeptical of Occidental’s decision. In addition, the Anadarko acquisition may have made Occidental larger, but it also makes it a company that’s back to using an unsuccessful strategy: “This capital-management model was the default approach in U.S. E&P during the past decade and represents a failed business model. It elicited massive underperformance in E&P with Generalist investors abandoning the sector along the way.”

Occidental is down 3.4% to $45.55 in recent trading.