CFO: Occidental Petroleum to sell recently acquired campus in Energy Corridor
 Email Share Share Tweet
 Print Order Reprints
Cedric Burgher is senior vice president and CFO at Occidental Petroleum Corp.
Enlarge
Cedric Burgher is senior vice president and CFO at Occidental Petroleum Corp.
COURTESY

IN THIS ARTICLE
Commercial Real Estate
Industry
Anadarko Petroleum
Company
Occidental Petroleum
Company
ConocoPhillips
Company
Cedric Burgher
Person


By Olivia Pulsinelli  –  Assistant managing editor, Houston Business Journal
Aug 15, 2019 Updated Aug 15, 2019, 11:42am CDT
Update: This story has been updated throughout with CFO Cedric Burgher's comments from his EnerCom keynote address on Aug. 12.

CREATE YOUR FREE ACCOUNT
BECOME A MEMBER

Join the Houston Business Journal to unlock even more insights!


Houston-based Occidental Petroleum Corp. (NYSE: OXY) won't be moving to the Energy Corridor after all.

During his keynote address at EnerCom's The Oil & Gas Conference in Denver on Aug. 12, CFO Cedric Burgher said the company will sell the former ConocoPhilips campus it recently acquired in the Energy Corridor and retain Anadarko Petroleum Corp.'s headquarters in The Woodlands — at least for now.

"The Anadarko towers in The Woodlands are something we're going to keep for an indefinite period," Burgher said.

Just last week, Occidental completed its acquisition of Anadarko, which was valued at $55 billion, including the assumption of Anadarko's debt. In June, the company sent an internal memo to employees indicating that the decision on whether to make the move to the Energy Corridor had been put on hold until the Anadarko integration process was complete. Previously, the move was set to start around the end of this year and be complete in 2020.

Now, Burgher said, real estate is not a primary focus for the company, which is working on integrating functional aspects of the businesses.

Occidental completed its acquisition of the former ConocoPhillips campus in January — by that point, the company had "kind of written off" a potential acquisition of Anadarko after previous negotiations, Burgher said.

The former ConocoPhillips campus at 600 N. Dairy Ashford spans roughly 1.4 million square feet across 62 acres. Houston-based ConocoPhillips (NYSE: COP) announced in November 2016 it would relocate its Houston headquarters to Energy Center 4 at 925 N. Eldridge Parkway.

"But the Conoco campus is not big enough (now with the acquisition of Anadarko), so we put that on the market — we're going to sell (it)," Burgher said. "That leaves us where we are at Greenway (Plaza) in Houston, and then (Anadarko has) The Woodlands footprint that's very large. We don't need it all, so we'll have to figure that out, but in the short term we need the space. We've got a large group for the Gulf of Mexico up there (and) the whole group covering their Africa assets."

However, Paris-based Total S.A. (NYSE: TOT) is acquiring Anadarko's Africa assets in an $8.8 billion deal, so a lot of those employees will be vacating the Anadarko towers, Burgher noted.

"Then over time, we'll likely have a decision to make on The Woodlands space," Burgher said. "But I think that's going to take several years, in my guess, and we'll just see how it plays out."

Occidental's local office has been in Greenway Plaza since 1987. The company announced in 2014 that it was relocating its headquarters from Los Angeles to Houston in Greenway Plaza. As of March 2018, Occidental was leasing approximately 961,000 square feet in 3 Greenway and 5 Greenway, according to PMRG research, and its lease expires in December 2026. That space was expected to be put up for sublease, but now that Occidental is staying put, that doesn't appear to be the case.

Meanwhile, it had been unclear what would happen to Anadarko's 30- and 31-story headquarter towers in The Woodlands following the Occidental acquisition. The Houston Chronicle recently reported that Occidental's leadership had indicated the company planned to sell the campus for a few hundred million dollars and lease back an unspecified amount of the space.






The Houston Business Journal also has reached out to Occidental.